Here at HDA we would like to say thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales for giving their
support so that we were able to undertake this short series of podcasts about Tiger
Bay, Bute Town and the docks.
This is the first of three parts which are conversation with Peter Phillips, well known
resident of Tiger Bay, musician, legendary for leading the funerals in a New Orleans
style.
This is the first episode from Peter Phillips.
So tell me tell me about childhood, early days.
I had a wonderful upbringing.
Born in 45 Christina Street Tiger Bay, 5th to 12th 1940.
Got a twin brother called Roy and I am one of a family of seven.
That's a small family for the Bay isn't it?
It all depends what family you're in.
Yeah but you know what I mean some of the families were huge man, huge.
When you say huge how you calculating that?
Well some people had eight or nine kids and others had you know less but some families
were really big.
Well growing up in the area like Tiger Bay you never noticed the amount of families.
We were all one family.
That's one of the things that I always found interesting as you know I come from Barry
all merchant seamen families as well and that's the way families mixed in.
Kids went to people's houses and had food and stuff like that.
Well I keep on telling my grandchildren, said Grampy was 30 before I realized everybody
in the ducks wasn't my auntie.
Yeah I know exactly what you mean and how many cousins as some people define them as
blood but otherwise how many cousins do we all have?
Well yeah you said it earlier we're all family I mean you would go and this is the problem
today when they killed the bay and knocked it down and moved everybody out you took the
society away you took family away because you move people out whereas you could pop
around the corner and see your auntie and uncle and your cousins go across the road
and see your granny or go around the corner and see your grandparents.
Now you don't see that it's gone.
By the time the children think about coming down to visit and getting the bus and getting
this and getting that they still would give it a miss and that's a sad sad fact about
the bay being crushed and that's what they did they crushed the bay.
I mean even that thing about kids that feeling as a kid of feeling safe but at the same time
everybody every adult knowing what you were doing so your parents knew what you were
doing but you were safe weren't you?
Oh yeah I mean for example if I was around another street in the docks and a lady come
out and said do your mother know you're here and you say yes Mrs. Sorenso or yes auntie
Sorenso she'd say they'd say well make sure you're home by five o'clock and you'll be
gone.
You wouldn't back chat you'd be gone because by the time you got home your mother and there
was no more by then but your parents would know where you were but that's community for
you that is community everybody cared about everybody.
But that's it it was people talk about villages but it was a village within Cardiff a total
village.
Oh it was fabulous if you come if you go down to Bute now there's only two ways to get in
and get out.
Mariah Street and Loudoun Square.
There's only two ways in and out.
Whereas before you could walk and operate at the top you can get out to Sapphire Street
you can get out to Loudoun Square you can get out to Tuck Church Street you can get
out to North Church Street it's all gone all gone.
There's two ways to get in and to get out Mariah Street and Loudoun Square and that's
it.
It feels a bit like cutting people off from the rest of the world.
Well that's their intention that's their intention what they would love to do is have everybody
out.
I mean when they start knocking down houses and putting us all in them skyspapers what
should have happened is what happened in in Splott because in Loudoun Square if you if
as you said you've been to the docks in Loudoun Square you could have made beautiful beautiful
flats out of them big big houses.
You could have made four flats in each house but no they knocked them down knocked them
down.
And what they did they killed the community because they put people into flats myself
my mother and everyone and they took away the fact that you had a garden where you had
chickens and you kept your people happy but they killed all up they killed all the poor
houses and everybody had nowhere to go.
Yeah and that and that thing the simple thing I can remember from my Nan in Barry that simple
thing of being on the doorstep.
Gone.
And the world going by and conversations.
Yep you could always tell when it was summertime because everybody was out on the door.
Everybody was up on the door and and you would check for everybody.
But the sad sad thing about it as I say to you was that the people who crippled the day
don't even live here.
No they don't even live here unless as you were saying earlier I told you in in the late
40s early 50s my mom's house was it quarter so Gala hands where they do all the pamphlets
and the leaflets because you Tiger Bay had a strong strong labor with a strong one.
Now you don't even know your who your candidate is you don't see him.
It was a melting pot that was beautiful.
It never over bubbled.
It was a melting pot and they whoever whoever it may be they just wanted to crush it.
That's all I want to do was crush it and they achieved that.
For no good reason they achieved it.
Well you know you know Barry as I do and and and also the Bay much better than I ever will.
And it's funny isn't it.
You're the you're the people who generate the money that makes a place what it is.
What would Cardiff be without the dogs.
It wouldn't even be the capital of Wales.
No no no and as I said to you that the sad thing about it is that the youngsters today
don't even know much about Cardiff because they don't even know what the court exchange means.
They haven't got a clue.
They don't even know when they walked on James Street and passed the piece of grass
past the police station that was the River Tuff coming through.
They haven't got a clue.
They don't even know about the badges coming through bringing the cold down.
Yeah and the canal.
They don't even know.
They don't even know that that where they call Cardiff Bay ships would come all the way right the way up
to the top of Bute Street and unload spuds from Ireland for Edward England.
They just think oh it's Cardiff Bay.
They don't even know it's a basin.
It's sad.
It is.
It is because when all is said and done it's that legacy the sweat of real working people
and their families the women that brought us all up.
Yeah.
You know while the men were away or whatever.
That's the minute that money stopped coming in like you know the dogs cold stopped at it.
They knocked it all down.
Well you just mentioned something there about being brought up.
I cringe when I hear these people crying about single parents as you know.
Our fathers were the way of seeing them.
Catch an 18 month trip you never seen.
Your mother brought you up and you got on with it.
They went to work.
They read this and now you hear them crying.
Oh single parents single parents.
But we were all brought up by single parents.
And as you say your granny was involved making sure that you got the school clean and tidy.
Yeah and if something happened if something happened so that a woman you know the mother of the family something happened to her.
Those kids would end up in a different house.
Someone would bring them up an auntie or whatever.
Her best friend or an auntie.
Well you must have you must have added in Barry like we did in the in the docs.
You would see somebody who had been working with somebody and the next thing you know they've gone and moved in.
And like you said they're like auntie they're like family.
There was no discrimination no discrimination.
I went to I went to South Church Street School and we had a young girl in our class who was a Jewish family.
She didn't say prayer.
She didn't go to to break in the in the in the school break in the playground.
She used to come to school dressed as if she was in the private school.
She used to wear a bowtie in the summer.
She wore a bowtie hat and she was just accepted.
As far as we knew she was our friend in school in the class.
Yeah.
And I tell you she was she was the niece of Mrs.
Balford who got murdered.
Right.
Yeah.
But she used to come to school.
She didn't go to private school but she was dressed immaculate.
And as I said you used to wear a bowtie a bowtie hat a bowtie hat.
And in the summer she wear a summer hat.
But as I said nobody passed no comment.
And even even within families you could have you could have a Muslim and a Christian parent.
People you know people it was as far as they were concerned like I both do what they wanted to do.
They were family and that was it.
And you might end up I mean I've been I've been down the mosque many times when I was a kid in Cardiff.
You know you know my uncle was involved.
You know I'm a Christian I was a Christian got nothing to do with it.
I mean come in and how many young Christian boys ended up in places like the the back room of the Cairo cafe where there were Muslim lessons going on because they might win in.
That's right.
There's loads went to Arab school just to learn.
It's it's a it's a fact.
But like I'm saying to you it was a beautiful melting pot.
Everybody knew everybody.
I I'll give you an example.
I had to attend the hospital the other month.
And that's what happened.
You know they come and take particulars of your name and address and everything.
So this young nurse said to me did you ever live in the docks.
Yeah it was born and bred in the docks.
So she said oh I wonder if you would know my grandfather.
So I said what's his name.
She said so and so and so.
I said yeah.
I said and when you go home tell your mother that you was talking to Peter Phillips.
She looked at me she said pardon.
I said tell your mother that you was talking to Peter Phillips.
She said my mother said your mother was in the same class as me.
Your auntie was in a class higher because she's older than me.
She couldn't believe it.
She said I always wanted to know about my grandfather.
So what you must remember is when we were growing up the only photos that the parents had was the father on his passport going to sea.
It wasn't like this mobile.
So she was on the phone.
On the phone she texted her mother and her mother said give him my love.
I haven't seen him for years.
So I started to tell her everybody who lived in Christina Street that's where we lived.
She couldn't believe it.
I told her who lived next door to her mother and the left side the right side and where I lived.
God she said.
I said where do you live.
She said Pentribane.
I don't know where are the people in the street.
That's the difference.
I said that's the difference.
I said I just and she was taking notes on the mobile.
Her mother said God Stuckies right.
That's everybody that lived in our street.
And I made the years of age now.
And I can still remember who was in my classroom who I played rugby with.
Boy went to school with.
And it's just tremendous.
But like I said she said oh God Stuckies I wish I had a father my grandfather.
I said well they're not a bonus so they wasn't taken.
Nobody took photos of them days.
Especially with the semen.
They just went to work and that was it.